========== EXPERIMENTAL ==========

 3303
Published on 21 May 2019. Downloaded by KEAN UNIVERSITY on 7/27/2019 11:06:22 AM. 
View Article Online
At alcohol conversions below ∼60%, conversion was calcu-
lated as the sum of all observed products according to eqn (2).
This was performed since small changes in feed alcohol
quantification can lead to large nonphysical fluctuations in
the
calculated
conversion;
carbon
balances
(carbon
out
divided by carbon in) ranged between 95 and 105 C%. The
yield of unidentified GC-detected species was estimated by
multiplying the unidentified GC area by the total yield of
identified products divided by the total GC area of such pro-
ducts. At elevated conversions where carbon balances are
lower (85–95%), conversion was calculated based on the dis-
appearance of the feed alcohol (eqn (3)) since eqn (2) does not
account for undetected heavy species which are more likely to
be present at these conversions.
Conversion ¼ X ¼
X
Y i
ð2Þ
Conversion ¼ X ¼ ˙nC;feed alcohol in ˙nC;feed alcohol out
˙nC;feed alcohol in
ð3Þ
Selectivities are calculated on a carbon basis from the yield
and the relevant metric for conversion based on eqn (4).
Conversions, yields, and selectivities are reported as averages
of at least two time points after steady-state was achieved.
Selectivityi ¼ Si ¼ Yi
X
ð4Þ
2.2.
Etherification
Etherification reactions were performed in a 45 mL Parr batch
reactor with a 2.22 cm stir rod. Amberlyst™70 was crushed
and sieved to <177 µm and dried at 110 °C prior to reaction. In
a typical reaction, 15 g of feed were first added to the reactor
along with 750 mg of Amberlyst™70. The reactor was then
sealed and pressurized with argon to ∼20 bar stirring at 750
rpm. The temperature was then heated to 150 °C with a ramp
time of ∼10 minutes prior to a 24 h hold. This temperature
was chosen to balance activity and selectivity, as increasing
temperature decreases the ether selectivity while decreasing
temperature decreases rates and therefore requires longer resi-
dence times to

e was then heated to 150 °C with a ramp
time of ∼10 minutes prior to a 24 h hold. This temperature
was chosen to balance activity and selectivity, as increasing
temperature decreases the ether selectivity while decreasing
temperature decreases rates and therefore requires longer resi-
dence times to obtain the same conversion.69 After 24 h the
reactor was immediately submerged in an ice bath and cooled
to <15 °C to minimize loss of volatile components. On several
occasions the gases were collected and analyzed to ensure that
this had been achieved. In the case of 1-butanol conversion,
for example, less than 0.1% of the carbon fed was observed in
the gas. After careful depressurization, the liquid products and
catalyst were collected. The reactor and reactor head were then
thoroughly rinsed (∼75 mL total) with 1,4-dioxane to ensure
full product collection. The resulting solution was then mixed
and filtered through a 0.22 µm syringe filter. This solution was
then further diluted in dioxane (20 : 1 by volume), and 1-penta-
nol was added as an internal standard prior to analysis. The
analysis of these products was otherwise the same as in
Guerbet coupling (i.e. GC methods). For these products,
however, species were often grouped by retention time since
isomer mixtures were commonly produced (i.e. olefin and
ether isomers). The conversion of a specific species i (Xi) was
calculated according to its disappearance according to eqn (3)
since carbon balances were often below 95%, suggesting that
undetectable species were being produced. Yields and selectiv-
ities were additionally calculated according to eqn (1) and (4),
respectively. When multiple components were present in the
feed, yields and selectivities were defined either with respect
to the conversion of a single compound or with respect to all
feed carbon.
2.3.
Additional analytical techniques
Additional
information
on
GC-detectable
products
was
obtained by GC coupled to field ionization mass spectrometry
(GC-MS-FI)


========== RESULTS ==========

 to a pseudo-equilibrium established
between the feed alcohol and aldehyde. It is therefore more
instructive to compare conversions and selectivities with
respect to consumption of the reactant alcohol in addition to
its aldehyde. These metrics better reflect the tendency of the
catalyst to promote desired alcohol coupling reactions versus
undesired dehydration side reactions. As such, an “eﬀective”
conversion and an “eﬀective” selectivity can be defined accord-
ing to eqn (5) and (6), respectively.
ConversionEffective ¼ XEff ¼ XCn alcohol YCn aldehyde
ð5Þ
Selectivityi;Effective ¼ Si;Eff ¼ Yi
XEff
ð6Þ
Here “Cn aldehyde” represents the aldehyde with the same
carbon number as the feed alcohol, i.e. acetaldehyde for
ethanol and butyraldehyde for 1-butanol. Over the contact
time range discussed, the eﬀective conversions of ethanol and
1-butanol according to these metrics therefore increase from
11.4 to 30.5% and from 3.7 to 15.1%, respectively. The
eﬀective alcohol selectivities decrease with conversion for both
feeds, from 93.2 to 86.5% for ethanol and from 87.9 to 85.5%
for 1-butanol. These are accompanied by increasing olefin
selectivities.
Ethanol and 1-butanol condensation were additionally
examined at 350 °C as shown in Fig. 3 (data at 520 s kgHAP
molalcohol
−1 provided in Table S1†). The absolute conversion of
ethanol increases with contact time from 26.5 to 55.9% while
1-butanol conversion increases from 14.8 to 41.4%. The
“eﬀective” conversion of ethanol increases over this range
from 25.2 to 55.0% while that of 1-butanol increases from 11.8
to 38.3%. These data indicate that all reaction rates decrease
with increasing contact time. Given that previous studies on
HAP have shown ethanol condensation to be nearly zero order
in ethanol pressure at similar conditions,57,76,78 it is unlikely
Fig. 1
Alcohol coupling pathway along with key side-reactions. An alcohol ﬁrst dehydrogenates to an aldehyde via surface-mediated or MPV trans-
fers. The aldehyde can then under

dominantly zero or one oxygen
atom. Deoxygenated species predominantly possess three
double-bond equivalents (DBE) and are therefore most likely
trienes. Oxygenates possess one, three, or four DBE and
therefore are not saturated alcohols. These may be aldehydes,
alkenols, alkenals, and alkylbenzenemethanols. As men-
tioned prior, Moteki and Flaherty showed that alkadienals
and alkatrienals can be produced from acetaldehyde oligo-
merization on HAP, the latter of which can be cyclized when
the species is larger than C8.82 Of the products identified,
only 65% are higher alcohols or aldehydes while 31% are
olefins and aromatics. The butanol condensation products
are largely detectable (95%) with 47% selectivity to alcohols,
18% selectivity to olefins and aromatics, 10% to 2-ethylhexa-
nal, 5% to butyraldehyde, and 8% to unidentified detectable
species. The higher carbon balance for 1-butanol is likely due
to the lower conversion achieved.
Fig. 4 plots the eﬀective alcohol selectivity and average
alcohol carbon number as a function of conversion for both
ethanol and 1-butanol feeds. This figure illustrates the major
challenge with Guerbet coupling to the distillate range: the
decreasing selectivity to higher alcohols observed with increas-
ing conversion. Ethanol condensation drops below a target
80% selectivity around 40–50% conversion, while butanol con-
densation drops below this threshold around 20–30% conver-
sion. At these conditions, the average carbon number of the
ethanol-derived alcohols is around 5 while that of the
1-butanol products is around 8. Distillate fuels are heavier,
however, ranging from 8 to 22 carbon atoms per molecule.
Heavier alcohol mixtures theoretically can be produced by
operating at higher conversions. The simplest model which
Fig. 3
Guerbet coupling of (a, b) ethanol and (c, d) 1-butanol with HAP as a function of contact time at 350 °C, 8 kPa alcohol, and 93 kPa H2.
Absolute (rather than “eﬀective”) conversions and selectivities are plott

c-
counted for in these data indicates that either undetected pro-
ducts are formed or that the response factors assumed for the
C12+ ethers are overestimated. The conversion of a 1 : 1 molar
ratio of 1-butanol and 2-ethyl–1-hexanol leads to an ether
selectivity of 59% and an olefin selectivity of 33% at 66% feed
conversion. The conversion of 1-butanol is 79% while that of
2-ethyl–1-hexanol is lower at 59%. The cross-etherification
product 1-butoxy-2-ethylhexane was positively identified via
GC-MS-EI, clearly showing that cross-etherification does occur
between linear and branched alcohols. The selectivity to this
C12 ether was also maximized with this equimolar feed as
shown in Fig. 7b. Guilera et al. similarly observed that the
selectivity to ethyl octyl ether in the cross-etherification of
ethanol and 1-octanol over Amberlyst™70 was maximized
with an equimolar feed.88 This maximum would be consistent
with a rate-limiting step either involving bond formation
between the two alcohols (which may or may not be bound to
Fig. 6
Conversions and selectivities in the dehydration of mixtures of 1-butanol and 2-ethyl–1-hexanol. Conditions: 15 g alcohol mixture, 0.75 g
Amberlyst™70, 150 °C, 24 h.
Fig. 7
Conversion and selectivities in the etheriﬁcation of 1-butanol and 2-ethyl–1-hexanol mixtures as a function of butanol feed content. (a)
Correlations between overall conversion, ether selectivity, and oleﬁn selectivity. (b) Selectivities to speciﬁc oleﬁns and ethers. Conditions: 15 g
alcohol mixture, 0.75 g Amberlyst™70, 150 °C, 24 h.
Paper
Green Chemistry
3312 | Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3300–3318
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Published on 21 May 2019. Downloaded by KEAN UNIVERSITY on 7/27/2019 11:06:22 AM. 
View Article Online
the catalyst) or the decomposition of an equilibrated surface
dimer to form an ether. The former is supported by Guilera
et al., though Song et al. have provided evidence for the latter
in the Brønsted acid catalyzed etherificatio

y in the
literature for heterogeneous Guerbet coupling to our knowl-
edge. Water is known to inhibit etherification reactions70,91,92
and therefore must be removed from the coupling products
prior to reaction. Here the addition of 7.4 wt% water to a
model mixture of 1-butanol and 2-ethyl–1-hexanol was found
to decrease conversion from 66 to 12% (Fig. S6†), though
drying with molecular sieves fully recovered the activity. Sieves
were therefore used to reduce the water content of the ethanol-
derived feed from 15 to less than 0.5 wt%. Ethanol was then
removed via distillation since etherification reactions involving
ethanol would produce significant amounts of volatile C4–C6
ethers. The major components in the resulting feed were
1-butanol (51.8 wt%), 2-ethyl–1-butanol (13.6 wt%), 1-hexanol
(12.5 wt%), and 2-ethyl–1-hexanol (4.1 wt%) with the remain-
der comprising other alcohols (4.7 wt%) and species not
detected via GC (13.2 wt%). 79.9 mol% of the alcohols in this
feed are linear. Using correlations between the linear alcohol
contents of model feeds and their etherification product distri-
butions, an ether selectivity of 76.4% and an olefin selectivity
of 9.8% were expected. In close agreement with these expec-
tations, the feed was converted to ethers with 73.5% alcohol
conversion, 71.6% ether selectivity, and 10.2% olefin selecti-
vity. This demonstrates that combination of the two catalytic
steps in series necessitates only conventional separation pro-
cesses already common in alcohol purification (i.e. distillation
and drying with molecular sieves) and that etherification selec-
tivities can be reasonably predicted based on model reactions
and the feed alcohol distribution.
A proposed block flow diagram of this technology is shown
in Fig. 10. Here the approximate carbon flows of key streams
are displayed assuming that Guerbet condensation is per-
formed at 50% conversion with 77% selectivity to alcohols.
The product is then separated into four streams: water,
e