========== ABSTRACT ==========

ABSTRACT: The kinetics of aldol condensation of acetaldehyde
were studied over anatase titania (TiO2), hydroxyapatite (HAP), and
magnesia (MgO). Reactions were carried out in a ﬁxed-bed reactor
with a total system pressure of 220 kPa at temperatures between 533
and 633 K and acetaldehyde partial pressures between 0.05 and 50
kPa. Crotonaldehyde was the only product observed over all three
catalysts, and severe catalyst deactivation occurred at acetaldehyde
partial pressures of 5 kPa or greater. The aldol condensation reaction
over all three catalysts was ﬁrst order at low acetaldehyde partial
pressure and approached zero order at high acetaldehyde partial
pressure. No kinetic isotope eﬀect (KIE) was observed with fully deuterated acetaldehyde reacting over TiO2 or HAP, implying
that C−H bond activation is not kinetically relevant. These measurements are consistent with a mechanism in which adsorption
and desorption steps are kinetically signiﬁcant during the reaction. Characterization of the catalysts by adsorption
microcalorimetry of acetaldehyde and ethanol and diﬀuse reﬂectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of adsorbed
acetaldehyde, crotonaldehyde, and acetic acid revealed a very high reactivity of these catalysts, even at low temperatures.
KEYWORDS: aldol condensation, Guerbet coupling, DRIFTS, microcalorimetry, kinetic isotope eﬀect
1.


========== EXPERIMENTAL ==========

experimental results involves the irreversible
adsorption of acetaldehyde and kinetically relevant desorption
of either crotonaldehyde or water, as shown in Scheme 1.
In an attempt to further explore the kinetic mechanism, the
inﬂuence of acetaldehyde on the condensation rate was
evaluated at higher partial pressures. Unfortunately, all three
catalysts deactivate rapidly at high acetaldehyde partial
pressures and steady-state rates cannot be measured. Indeed,
Rekoske and Barteau discovered severe deactivation of titania
during the ﬁrst 10 min of aldol condensation of acetaldehyde
Figure 1. Rates collected over 6 h at 5 kPa acetaldehyde partial
pressure. TiO2 and HAP were run at 553 K, and MgO was run at 673
K. Results were ﬁtted to a three-parameter empirical hyperbolic
function.
Figure 2. Rate of aldol condensation of acetaldehdye at low partial
pressure over (a) HAP and (b) TiO2.
Table 1. Kinetic Isotope Eﬀect for Aldol Condensation of
Acetaldehyde over HAP and TiO2 at 553 K
catalyst
acetaldehyde partial
pressure (kPa)
kH (mol kPa−1
m−2 s−1)
kD (mol kPa−1
m−2 s−1)
kH/kD
HAP
0.097
2.5 × 10−8
2.2 × 10−8
1.1
TiO2
0.26
8.6 × 10−9
8.8 × 10−9
0.98
ACS Catalysis
Research Article
DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.6b00264
ACS Catal. 2016, 6, 3193−3202
3195
under conditions similar to the high-pressure acetaldehyde
experiments reported here.27 In an attempt to minimize the
inﬂuence of deactivation on the reaction kinetics, initial rates
were estimated by extrapolating the rate curves over 6 h of
reaction to zero time on stream. The three-parameter
hyperbolic function shown in eq 1 was used to determine
initial rates.
=
+
+
r
c
c t
c
1
1
2
3
(1)
The functional form was found to ﬁt the deactivation curves
well, as shown in Figure 1. An empirical function such as this is
commonly used to model a deactivating catalyst.35
The aldol condensation reaction over the three catalysts was
performed at multiple acetaldehyde partial pressures, and the
results are shown in Figure 3. Titania was the m

y-state rates measured at low pressure to within a
factor of 2 over TiO2 and within 30% over HAP. The model
agreement involving rates measured at steady state (low
pressure) and initial rates measured on a deactivating system
(higher pressure) suggests that the initial rates are a reasonable
approximation of the steady-state rates at higher acetaldehyde
partial pressures, although the uncertainty in k2 could be quite
high, as it is determined solely by the high-pressure initial rates.
The calculated groupings of rate parameters are shown in
Table 2. It was not possible to statistically evaluate individual
rate constants on the basis of the current data set because the
value of [*]0 was highly correlated to k1. Therefore, we needed
to seek an independent estimate of [*]0, which will be
discussed later. The acetaldehyde adsorption rate constant k1
appears to be relatively similar among the three catalysts,
assuming the active site densities ([*]0) among the catalysts are
not too diﬀerent. The order of magnitude diﬀerence in k1/2k2
suggests that the main diﬀerence among the catalysts is the rate
at which product desorbs from the catalyst surface. Indeed, the
ﬁtted values indicate the lowest value of k2, the product
desorption rate constant, is associated with MgO, which is a
strong base catalyst, and the greatest value of k2 is associated
with TiO2. Because the product desorption rate constant has
signiﬁcant uncertainty, as it was estimated from rapidly
deactivating catalysts, additional information about the
interactions of aldehydes with the catalysts is needed to
validate the reactivity trends. Hence, we used adsorption
microcalorimetry and DRIFTS of adsorbed aldehydes to
complement the results derived from reaction kinetics, as will
be discussed later.
At ﬁrst glance, our results may seem inconsistent with those
of Ho et al., who propose enolate formation from acetaldehyde
as the rate-determining step during Guerbet coupling of
ethanol over HAP.13 Under the conditi


========== RESULTS ==========

that Guerbet coupling proceeds through a
direct condensation mechanism.15 In an attempt to elucidate
the role of aldol condensation in the Guerbet coupling reaction,
the aldol condensation of acetaldehyde was studied over a
series of catalysts.
Aldol condensation is a well-studied reaction that forms a
carbon−carbon bond between two aldehyde or ketone
molecules. Aldol condensation is a critical step in the
production of 2-ethyhexanal, isophorone, and crotonaldehyde.
Received:
January 26, 2016
Revised:
April 6, 2016
Research Article
pubs.acs.org/acscatalysis
© XXXX American Chemical Society
3193
DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.6b00264
ACS Catal. 2016, 6, 3193−3202
This reaction can be catalyzed by a wide variety of solid acid or
base catalysts such as zeolites,16 hydrotalcites and hydrotalcite-
derived materials,1,17−21 metal oxides and supported metal
oxides,22−29 and hydroxyapatite.30
In the current study, rate measurements were carried out
over multiple catalysts to explore the kinetic mechanism of
aldol condensation and provide insight into the Guerbet
coupling of ethanol. The condensation reaction was studied
over three catalysts: anatase TiO2, HAP, and MgO. Both HAP
and MgO are common Guerbet coupling catalysts, whereas
TiO2 is a commonly studied catalyst for aldol condensation.
Diﬀuse reﬂectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy
(DRIFTS) and adsorption microcalorimetry of various probe
molecules were used to probe the aﬃnity of catalyst surfaces for
species relevant to the condensation reaction.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Catalyst Synthesis. A near-stoichiometric hydrox-
yapatite was synthesized using the coprecipitation method
described by Tsuchida et al.7 Brieﬂy, 200 cm3 of 0.5 M calcium
nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO3)2·4H2O, Acros Organics) and
200 cm3 of 0.3 M diammonium phosphate ((NH4)2HPO4,
Aldrich, >99.99%) adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium
hydroxide were added dropwise to 100 cm3 of distilled and
deionized water at 353 K. The slurry was left for 24 h at 3

00 cm3 of 0.5 M calcium
nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO3)2·4H2O, Acros Organics) and
200 cm3 of 0.3 M diammonium phosphate ((NH4)2HPO4,
Aldrich, >99.99%) adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium
hydroxide were added dropwise to 100 cm3 of distilled and
deionized water at 353 K. The slurry was left for 24 h at 353 K
with stirring. The resulting powder was ﬁltered, washed with
distilled and deionized water three times, and dried overnight in
air at 373 K.
Commercially available magnesia (Ube Material Industries,
Ltd., Lot No. 109071725) and anatase titania (Aldrich, 99.8%)
were purchased. All three catalysts were thermally treated at
873 K under 100 cm3 min−1 ﬂowing air for 2 h prior to
characterization and use in reaction. The powders were
subsequently pelletized, crushed, and sieved to 106−180 μm.
2.2. Catalyst Characterization. X-ray diﬀraction (XRD)
was performed with a PANalytical X’Pert Pro diﬀractometer
using Cu Kα radiation to verify crystal structure and phase
purity.
Elemental analysis of HAP was performed by Galbraith
Laboratories (Knoxville, TN) using inductively coupled plasma
optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) for calcium and
phosphorus content.
The catalyst surface area was obtained from N2 adsorption at
77 K on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 automated analyzer using
the BET method.
2.3. Aldol Condensation of Acetaldehyde. Kinetic
studies were carried out in a stainless steel, downward ﬂow,
ﬁxed-bed reactor. Prior to reaction, HAP and MgO were heated
in situ at 773 K for 1 h in 100 cm3 min−1 dry air (GTS-Welco),
while TiO2 was heated for 2 h at 773 K in 100 cm3 min−1 dry
air. A dinitrogen (GTS-Welco, 99.999%) stream containing
acetaldehyde was passed over the catalyst for 10 min prior to
product analysis with an online gas chromatograph equipped
with a PoraPLOT Q-HT column and ﬂame ionization detector.
The concentration of acetaldehyde was controlled by diluting
the saturated dinitrogen stream with ﬂowing dinitrogen as well
as cooling the saturator with either a wa

 A sample
was ﬁrst outgassed at 773 K for 16 h at 10−2 Pa. The treated
sample was then cooled and placed in an isothermal block
maintained at 303 K for 2 h to reach thermal equilibrium. The
sample was exposed to doses of acetaldehyde or ethanol via a
volumetric dosing system, and each dose was allowed to reach
equilibrium with the sample over 15 min. The acetaldehyde
(Aldrich, 99.5%) and ethanol (Aldrich, anhydrous, >99.5%)
used in these experiments were further degassed by three
freeze−pump−thaw cycles prior to adsorption experiments.
2.5. Diﬀuse Reﬂectance Infrared Fourier Transform
Spectroscopy (DRIFTS). Stepwise temperature-programmed
desorption of acetaldehyde, crotonaldehyde, and acetic acid was
measured using a Bio-Rad (FTS-60A) FTIR spectrometer
equipped with a liquid N2 cooled MCT detector. A 5 wt %
catalyst sample (TiO2, HAP, or MgO) diluted with KBr powder
was pretreated at 773 K for 1 h under 30 cm3 min−1 ﬂowing
He. Background scans were collected at multiple temperatures
after waiting for 15 min to allow the catalyst bed to reach
thermal equilibrium. After background scans were collected, a
30 cm3 min−1 He stream passed through a saturator at either
room temperature (for crotonaldehyde and acetic acid) or dry
ice−acetone temperature (for acetaldehyde). The saturated He
stream was passed over the catalyst for 15 min at 303 K. The
catalyst was purged with pure He for 15 min at 303 K to
remove the gas phase and weakly adsorbed probe molecules.
The temperature was then increased in a stepwise manner while
continuously ﬂowing He. Scans were collected at each
temperature after the system was purged for 15 min at that
temperature.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Catalyst Characterization. The BET surface areas of
TiO2, HAP, and MgO were found to be 9, 29, and 35 m2 g−1,
respectively. The ICP-OES results for HAP showed a Ca/P
ratio of 1.70, which is very close to the stoichiometric value of
1.67. All catalysts were found to be phase pure and had XRD
patterns tha

itions at low acetaldehyde pressure. The order of
reaction over HAP under these conditions is 0.9. Interestingly,
changing the reaction temperature by 20 K had no measurable
eﬀect on the rate of reaction over HAP, implying a very low
activation energy. The reaction is also ﬁrst order over TiO2, but
the temperature dependence of the rate indicated an apparent
activation energy of 47 kJ mol−1, which is also low. An apparent
activation energy for MgO was not measured because of
deactivation even at low partial pressures of acetaldehyde.
In an attempt to explore the mechanism of aldol
condensation over TiO2 and HAP, fully deuterated acetalde-
hyde was used to check for a kinetic isotope eﬀect (KIE). The
kinetic isotope studies were carried out at low acetaldehyde
partial pressures to avoid the eﬀects of deactivation. Table 1
shows the KIE evaluated over both TiO2 and HAP. The
apparent ﬁrst-order rate constants kH and kD were calculated by
normalizing the rate of reaction by the acetaldehyde partial
pressure. The ratio of kH to kD is very close to unity for the
reactions on TiO2 and HAP. The lack of a kinetic isotope eﬀect
shows that C−H activation is not kinetically relevant over
either catalyst.
Elementary steps for aldol condensation include acetalde-
hyde adsorption, enolate formation, C−C coupling, dehydra-
tion, and product desorption. The fact that C−H bond
activation is not kinetically relevant implies that enolate
formation is not the rate-determining step, because it is the
result of α-H abstraction from the surface-bound aldehyde.
Results from adsorption microcalorimetry and infrared spec-
troscopy, discussed later, indicate that surface reactions of
adsorbed aldehydes occur readily under very mild conditions. If
a bimolecular surface reaction between surface enolate and
acetaldehyde were rate limiting, the condensation reaction
would be second order in acetaldehyde instead of the observed
ﬁrst order. Construction of a Langmuir−Hinshelwood rate
equation assumi