========== ABSTRACT ==========

ABSTRACT: This article is an up-to-date review of the literature available on the subject of ethanol to ethylene. The process of
ethanol to ethylene has broad development prospects. Compared with the process of petroleum to ethylene, ethanol dehydration
to ethylene is economically feasible. Researchers have been redirecting their interest to the ethylene production process, catalysts,
and reaction mechanisms. A ﬂuidized bed reactor, together with a wear-resistant, eﬃcient, and stable catalyst will be the focus of
future research that includes a deep understanding of the large-scale activated alumina catalyst and the molecular sieve catalyst
used, and will promote the development of the ethanol dehydration to ethylene process and provide strong support for the
market competiveness of the process.
1.


========== EXPERIMENTAL ==========

experimental


========== RESULTS ==========

oric acid, oxides,
molecular sieves, and miscellaneous acid catalyst.54
4.1. Catalyst of Phosphoric Acid System. The ﬁrst catalyst
used in the industrial equipment of ethanol catalytic dehydration to
ethylene plant was the catalyst of phosphoric acids. In the 1930s, it
was developed by the British Imperial Chemical (ICI) by loading
phosphate on clay or coke.55 Donald et al.56 have researched the
reaction temperature, alcohol concentration, space velocity, and the
impact of the catalyst regeneration times on the reaction of ethanol
catalytic dehydration to ethylene with phosphoric acid catalyst. The
ethylene from ethanol dehydration reaction with phosphoric acid
catalyst is of high purity; however, the catalyst is easily deactivated by
coke deposition, and it requires about a month to regenerate. Since
the 1950s, such catalysts have no longer been used.
4.2. Oxide Catalyst. The oxide catalyst of ethanol
dehydration is the typical representative of actived alumina-
based catalysts. The catalyst currently used in the industrial
equipment of the ethanol dehydration to ethylene is mainly the
actived alumina-based catalyst.57 Alumina is an important catalyst
or catalyst carrier. It has long been found that alumina could be used
for the alcohol dehydration reaction and also used in many other
chemical reactions such as isomerization, alkylation, and catalytic
cracking, etc.58
In the 1950s, there was a lot of production equipment for
ethanol dehydration to ethylene built in Asia and South America,
mainly using clay or alumina as the catalyst. Comparison of the
two catalysts shows that the deactivation of clay is more serious
than that of alumina, while the ethylene product obtained from
alumina catalyzing ethanol dehydration is of relatively low purity,
which is about 96% to 97%.59 In 1960, when Lummus in America
built the industrial plant of ethanol to ethylene in India, γ-Al2O3
was used as the catalyst, and the ethanol conversion rate was up
to 99%, and the yield of ethyl

ed from
alumina catalyzing ethanol dehydration is of relatively low purity,
which is about 96% to 97%.59 In 1960, when Lummus in America
built the industrial plant of ethanol to ethylene in India, γ-Al2O3
was used as the catalyst, and the ethanol conversion rate was up
to 99%, and the yield of ethylene was 94%.60 Roca et al.61 have
investigated the ethanol dehydration reaction on the Si−Al
catalyst, and they found that ethylene was the main product, and
ethylene and the byproduct ether followed the parallel reaction
mechanism. In the 1980s, American Halcon Scientiﬁc Design
Inc. successfully developed a new type of multioxide catalysts
with the main components of A12O3−MgO/SiO2, which were
named the Syndol catalyst and were used in industrial equivalent
temperature ﬁxed bed reactors; the ethanol conversion rate was
97%−99%, and the product ethylene selectivity was nearly 97%;
the one-way cycle of the catalyst was 8−12 months.62 The Syndol
catalyst is considered as a kind of highly eﬀective catalyst for
ethanol dehydration to ethylene. Kochar et al.63 have investigated
the reaction of ethanol dehydration to ethylene with Syndol
catalyst, and found that the rising of the reaction temperature
was conducive to the improvement of ethylene selectivity. Ezzo
et al.64−66 performed further research on the Al2O3−Cr2O3
catalyst, put the catalyst in an ethanol catalytic conversion
reaction, and found that the main gas product was ethylene and
the liquid products were mainly water, ether, and a small amount
of acetaldehyde and acetone. The addition of Cr2O3 improved
the activity of the catalyst for ethanol dehydration, and the
generation rate of ethylene on the catalyst surface was fastest at
673 K. In the study, Kojima et al.67 found that the catalyst for the
ethanol dehydration to ethylene with a higher conversion rate of
raw materials and the selectivity of target products can be
prepared by adding a small amount of Ca, Mg, or Zn phosphate
in the alumina. EI-Katatny et al.68 h

y. To solve
the aforementioned problems, the researchers modiﬁed the ZSM-5
zeolite with the hot water treatment, ion exchange, impregnation,
and other methods. Pan, L. V. et al.81,82 modiﬁed HZSM-5 zeolite
and then developed NKC-03A catalyst, using industrial ethanol as
the raw material, when the temperature was 533 K, space velocity
was 2.3 h−1, the ethanol conversion rate was 98%, and ethylene
selectivity was 98−99%. The catalyst has been used in industrialized
column tube reactors. Le Van Mao et al.83 studied the ethanol
catalytic dehydration reaction with ZSM-5 zeolite modiﬁed with
zinc and manganese, and found that when the temperature was
673Kwith space velocityof2.5h−1,theliquidethanolcontentofraw
material was 75%, the ethanol conversion rate was 99% and C2∼C4
oleﬁn yield was 94%, which mainly was ethylene. Bun et al.84 used
ZSM-5 zeolite modiﬁed with H, Cu ion for ethanol conversion
reaction separately, and the results showed that the H-ZSM-5
catalyzed ethanol dehydrogenation eﬀectively, while the ethanol on
Cu-ZSM-5 zeolite was deeply oxidized to generate CO2 and CO;
increasing the hydroxyl on the H-NaZSM-5 surface can enhance the
dehydrogenation activity and decrease oxidation activity. Increasing
Cu ions on the Cu-NaZSM-5 surface is good for the ethanol
catalytic oxidation reaction. Takahara et al.85 researched the reaction
of the ethanol dehydration to ethylene on diﬀerent solid acid
catalysts, including mordenite, ZSM-5 zoelite, Hβ hydrogen type
zoelite, and Si−Al compounds, and the results showed that the
catalyst activity was related to the number of B acid sites, and
mordenite had the highest catalytic activity for alcohol dehydroge-
nation. Jia, O. Y. et al.86 conducted the ethanol dehydration reaction
on ZSM-5 zeolite catalyst modiﬁed with La in the laboratory
bioreactor. During the reaction over 950 h, the ethanol conversion
rate and ethylene selectivity were above 98%, and the time required
for the catalyst regeneration was no more than 830 h. Ra

n 533 K, the
ethanol conversion rate was about 90% and ethylene selectivity
was about 99%; and the ether was generated when the reaction
temperature was below 533 K or space velocity was larger. Under
the reaction conditions (reaction condition: temperature of 49−
533 K, LHSV 2 h−1), the catalytic activity of SAPO-34 was better
than that of ZSM-5. Under the conditions of temperature of
673 K, mass ratio of ethanol/water of 1, the pressure of ethanol
and moisture of 0.4 MPa (carrier gas is Ar), and space velocity of
16.7 h−1, Dahl et al.91 studied the reaction of ethanol dehydration
on SAPO-34 and found that ethanol was quickly translated into
ethylene and water on SAPO-34 pretreated by propylene. The
ethylene conversion process is not diﬀusion-limited under these
reaction conditions. Zhang et al.92 compared the activity and stability
of four kinds of catalysts in the reaction of ethanol dehydration to
ethylene, namely γ-Al2O3, HZSM-5 (Si/Al = 25), SAPO-34, and
NiAPSO-34, and found that the activity of the catalysts in descending
order was HZSM-5 > NiAPSO-34 > SAPO-34 > γ-Al2O3 (reaction
condition: temperature 723 K (γ-Al2O3), 573 K (HZSM-5), and
623 K (SAPO-34 and NiAPSO-34), LHSV 3 h−1), while in the
stability test under 100 h, SAPO-34 and NiAPSO-34 have the best
stability.Afterconsideringallthe aspects,NiAPSO-34is most suitable
for the ethanol catalytic dehydration to ethylene reaction. Zhou T.
et al.93 studied the ethanol (mass concentration is 99.7%) dehydra-
tion to ethylene reaction on the composite catalyst of SAPO-11/
HZSM-5 and found that the increase of the catalyst acidity helped to
improve the ethanol conversion rate and ethylene yield, when the
pressure was 0.1 MPa, the temperature was 513 K, the space velocity
was 1.2 h−1, the ethanol conversion rate was 99.19%, and ethylene
selectivity was 98.77%; when the ethanol conversion rate and
ethylene selectivity both reached 99.00%, the reaction temperature of
the catalyst was 60 K lower than those of HZSM-5