========== EXPERIMENTAL ==========

Experimental
2.1. Catalyst preparation
The synthesis of the porous oxides involved the use of alumi-
num tri-sec-butoxide (AlĲO-s-But)3) and magnesium nitrate or
calcium nitrate. The assembly of the emulsified system oc-
curred
by
the
simultaneous
utilization
of
n-dodecane,
Pluronic P123 (block copolymer, 20 EO : 70 PO : 20 EO, Mw. of
5826 g mol−1) and ethanol as solvent, where Pluronic P123
and n-dodecane were the organic pore structure directing
agents (PSDA).29,35
The dispersion of the n-dodecane in ethanol occurred at
room temperature. The final mole composition of the sol
was: 0.01 Pluronic: 1 (AlĲO-s-But)3): 1 MgĲNO3)2 or CaĲNO3)2:
15 ethanol. A 29 wt% solution of ammonium hydroxide was
added dropwise under stirring to produce the sol–gel transi-
tion (pH 10). The reference samples were prepared in the
same procedure, though without addition of PSDA. The as-
synthesized samples were calcined at 700 °C for 6 h under air
flow to produce mixed oxides. For synthesis of Cu-doped cat-
alysts, the mixed oxides were then dispersed in Milli-Q water,
and tetraamminecopperĲII) sulfate monohydrate [CuĲNH3)4SO4
·H2O, Sigma-Aldrich] was added to the suspension under con-
tinuous mixing at room temperature. The pH was adjusted to
9 through dropwise addition of dilute 2 mol L−1 nitric acid
(Sigma-Aldrich). The mixture was aged for 20 h while being
stirred at room temperature, and the solid material was then
filtered and washed with deionized water. The sample was
dried overnight at 110 °C in air. The dried catalyst was
pretreated in a flow-through cell at a temperature of 500 °C
(with a heating rate of 1 °C min−1) under a helium flow
(30 mL min−1) for 3 h, followed by air flow, switched to He
for 20 min, reduced under hydrogen flow, and finally passi-
vated at room temperature with 1% O2 in He. AlMgO and
AlCaO catalysts were prepared with and without an emulsion,
with the former denoted by “-P” to imply the added porosity.
All catalysts were examined for catalytic activity wi

tched to He
for 20 min, reduced under hydrogen flow, and finally passi-
vated at room temperature with 1% O2 in He. AlMgO and
AlCaO catalysts were prepared with and without an emulsion,
with the former denoted by “-P” to imply the added porosity.
All catalysts were examined for catalytic activity with and
without the addition of Cu.
2.2. Methods for the characterization of structure of oxides
Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms were recorded at
−195 °C and P/P0 ranging between 0.001 and 0.998, using a
Micromeritics ASAP 2020 instrument. Samples were degassed
prior to analysis at 200 °C for 6 h under a vacuum of 10 μPa.
The specific surface area was calculated according to the BET
equation39 and the pore size distribution was determined
using the BJH equation.
The thermal behavior of the AlMgO and AlCaO samples,
calcined and exposed to atmospheric environment, was in-
vestigated by thermogravimetric analysis, performed from
room temperature up to 900 °C under air flow (50 mL min−1),
by using a SDT600 TA Instruments at a heating rate of
10 °C min−1.
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was
performed using a FEI Titan STEM instrument with a Cs
probe aberration corrector operated at 200 kV with a spatial
resolution of <0.1 nm. A high-angle annular dark-field
(HAADF) mode with a HAADF detector angle ranging from 54
to 270 mrad, a probe convergence angle of 24.5 mrad, and a
probe current of approximately 25 pA was used to record the
images. Catalyst samples were suspended in ethanol and
then dropped on a holey carbon Au TEM grid. Samples were
plasma cleaned before being loaded into the microscope. Par-
ticle sizes were calculated based on a minimum of 800 parti-
cles for each sample.
The Cu loading of catalysts were determined with induc-
tively coupled plasma absorption emission spectroscopy (ICP-
AES) using a PerkinElmer Plasma 400 ICP emission spectro-
meter. Typically, 20 mg catalyst samples were digested with a
Catalysis Science & Technology
Paper
Pu


========== RESULTS ==========

versus Lewis acid sites on
Cu catalysts were determined via pyridine FTIR analyses in
the range of 1350–1650 cm−1 (Fig. 3). The absence of a band
near 1540 cm−1 indicative of pyridinium cations (PyH+) re-
flects the lack of Brønsted acid sites (B), while a band cen-
tered at 1450 cm−1 – corresponding to pyridine chemisorbed
on Lewis acid sites (L) – was clearly observed. The ratio of
Brønsted sites to total acid sites (T) was found to be close to
zero for all catalysts, indicating that only Lewis acidity is
present. A physisorbed pyridine band is observed for AlCaO
catalysts, which is a result of the overall low acidity of these
catalysts as supported by NH3-TPD measurements. These re-
sults are in agreement with those of Lercher and Prescott
et al.43,44 who observed only Lewis acidity on Al2O3–MgO
catalysts.
3.2. Catalytic performance in high-pressure Guerbet coupling
of ethanol
Ethanol conversion over mixed-metal oxides doped with tran-
sition metals produces various species through a variety of
Table 1
BET area, Cu loading, Cu particle size, Cu0 site density, and distribution of strengths of surface acid and basic sites
Sample
BET area (m2 g−1)
Cu loadinga (%)
Cu particle sizeb (nm)
Cu0 sitesc (μmol g−1)
Total NH3
d (μmol g−1)
Total CO2
e (μmol g−1)
Cu/AlMgO
106
8.0
3.7
67
92.9
115
Cu/AlMgO-P
171
8.0
2.1
91
106
78.6
Cu/AlCaO
102
9.0
2.6
118
10.1
52.4
Cu/AlCaO-P
120
9.6
3.1
140
12.5
49.7
AlMgO
191
—
—
76.9
192
AlMgO-P
315
—
—
85.6
238
AlCaO
133
—
—
—f
43.8
AlCaO-P
202
—
—
4.0
46.9
a Cu loading determined by ICP. b Cu particle sizes obtained from STEM. c Metallic copper sites quantified by N2O chemisorption. d Acid sites
quantified from NH3-TPD profiles. e Base sites quantified with CO2-TPD profiles. f Without significant acidity.
Fig. 2
Transmission electron microscopy images and particle size
distributions.
Fig. 3
IR spectra of adsorbed pyridine on Cu catalysts.
Catalysis Science & Technology
Paper
Published on 02 April 2019. Downloaded by Universidad Autonoma de

he activity was not sufficient to achieve
equilibrium under most conditions.
Based on these findings, the catalysts synthesized in this
study were compared in a H2 environment at 32 bar total
pressure. Stable performance was observed for all catalysts
between 10 and 30 h time-on-stream (TOS). Conversions and
selectivities for Cu-doped catalysts are reported in Fig. 6.
Cu/AlMgO and Cu/AlMgO-P showed similar activities with
conversions of 19.7 and 23.3%, respectively. These catalysts
were more active than their Ca counterparts with conversions
of 8.7 and 8.4% for Cu/AlCaO for Cu/AlCaO-P, respectively. At
these conditions, Cu/AlMgO and Cu/AlMgO-P were also more
selective to desired condensation products (54.8 and 48.8%,
respectively)
than
Cu/AlCaO
and
Cu/AlCaO-P
(21.8
and
23.5%, respectively). The Ca catalysts were more selective to
acetaldehyde at these conditions, though the acetaldehyde
yield was similar for all catalysts. As noted earlier, acetalde-
hyde is produced at nearly equilibrium levels on these cata-
lysts, thus it may be more informative to compare product se-
lectivities with the omission of acetaldehyde. In this case, Mg
catalysts remain more selective to C4+ aldehydes and alcohols
than the Ca catalysts with adjusted selectivities of 62.5% and
54.0% for Cu/AlMgO and Cu/AlMgO-P, respectively, versus
35.7% and 38.5% for Cu/AlCaO and Cu/AlCaO-P, respectively.
These comparisons are notably made at different conver-
sions, though it is unlikely that Ca catalysts will show im-
proved adjusted selectivities upon increasing conversion.
In the absence of Cu, lower activities were observed with
AlMgO and AlMgO-P achieving only 7.1 and 11.1% conver-
sion, respectively and AlCaO and AlCaO-P demonstrating
essentially no activity with ∼0.2% conversion (Fig. S3†). The
particularly low activities of the Cu-free Ca catalysts are con-
sistent with their low numbers of acid and base sites com-
pared to the Mg catalysts, as measured by TPD. Upon Cu
addition, the acetaldehy

nd AlCaO and AlCaO-P demonstrating
essentially no activity with ∼0.2% conversion (Fig. S3†). The
particularly low activities of the Cu-free Ca catalysts are con-
sistent with their low numbers of acid and base sites com-
pared to the Mg catalysts, as measured by TPD. Upon Cu
addition, the acetaldehyde yield increased by 10–15 times
for the Mg catalysts and 70–75 times for the Ca catalysts,
consistent with the observation by Gines et al. that ethanol
dehydrogenation rate over K–Mg5CeOx at atmospheric pres-
sure increased by nearly two orders of magnitude upon ad-
dition of 7 wt% Cu, allowing for equilibration to occur at
longer contact times.18 The desired product yield also in-
creased by 2–5 times for the Mg catalysts and 14–30 times
for the Ca catalysts upon Cu addition. These increases may
be due to either (1) the increase in acetaldehyde pressures
resulting from Cu-catalyzed ethanol dehydrogenation, (2)
the addition of sites which enable H-transfer between the
support and the gas-phase, or (3) the addition of Cu sites
capable of catalyzing condensation reactions independently
from the support. The first would be true if aldolization is a
key condensation pathway. The second has notably been
proposed by Gines et al. to explain the improved condensa-
tion rates with Cu addition to K–Mg5CeOx at atmospheric
pressure with an inert co-feed gas.18 The third has been
noted to occur over Cu, though it is typically observed
alongside significant esterification.25 The role that Cu plays
is dependent on the mechanism of alcohol condensation,
which has been debated in the literature. The two general
mechanisms proposed for alcohol condensation on hete-
rogeneous
catalysts
are
the
Guerbet
coupling
reaction,
which formally involves aldolization with aldehyde interme-
diates, and direct alcohol condensation, wherein aldehydes
do not serve as key intermediates. The relevance of aldoliza-
tion has been challenged by Meunier et al. who showed
Fig. 6
Conversion and selectivities to

 pro-
duced via n-butanol dehydrogenation, thus the butyralde-
hyde : n-butanol ratio must be less than or equal to the equi-
librium ratio (estimated to be 0.034 at these conditions).
The calculated ratio is higher than this for all catalysts (be-
tween 0.037 and 0.071), however, thus an alternate conden-
sation mechanism must be present to explain butyraldehyde
formation. Additionally, the improved condensation yields
measured upon Cu addition are more mechanistically con-
sistent with promotion of an aldehyde-mediated route than
a direct condensation route. The possibility that both direct
and indirect condensation mechanisms are active cannot be
discounted,
however,
especially
for
Cu/AlMgO
catalysts.
Given that AlCaO and AlCaO-P are essentially inactive before
Cu addition, the indirect route is also most likely dominant
for Cu/AlCaO catalysts.
Other than acetaldehyde, the main side-products ob-
served with Cu-doped catalysts were ethylene/ethane (EtEn/
An, 8.5–11.0% selectivity), C4+ alkenes/alkanes (C4+ AlkEn/
An, 0.9–12.1%), diethyl ether (DEE, 3.4–11.2%), and ethyl
acetate (EtOAc, 2.3–5.6%). In the absence of Cu, diethyl
ether is the dominant side-product on Mg catalysts with
∼50% selectivity. The higher yield of diethyl ether versus
ethylene has been commonly observed over AlMgxOy cata-
lysts.26,53 Diethyl ether production on Mg catalysts is greatly
inhibited upon Cu addition, thus dispersed Cu particles
may cover sites which promote intramolecular dehydration.
Another possibility is that new sites are formed upon Cu ad-
dition which promote dehydration of diethyl ether to ethyl-
ene, since the yield to ethylene and ethane increase upon
Cu addition (with the latter forming via ethylene hydrogena-
tion). Both possibilities are consistent with the simulta-
neous
decrease
in
basicity
(thought
to
catalyst
inter-
molecular dehydration) and increase in acidity (thought to
catalyze intramolecular dehydration) upon Cu addition to
Mg catalysts, as measured by TPD.26