========== ABSTRACT ==========

ABSTRACT: The direct conversion of ethanol to aromatic
alcohols has attracted much attention as increasingly available
biomass ethanol fermented from renewable sources. Herein, we
present a highly efficient zinc hydroxyapatite for direct synthesis of
aromatic alcohols from ethanol with a specific rate of 1.95 × 10−7
molaromatics gcatal
−1 s−1, which is up to now the best in the literature.
The γ-C of 2-butenal after deprotonation undergoes the
nucleophilic attack to the carbonyl-C of another 2-butenal to
form 2,4,6-octatrienal, which is subsequently cyclized to give
ortho-aromatics, as the main pathway for the aromatization.
Dynamic and theoretical studies reveal that the Zn site plays a role
in hydrogen transfer for dehydrogenation and hydrogenation. The substitution of the Zn atom for the Ca atom was identified at the
strong basic [Ca−O−P] site, and the Zn site lowers the energy barrier to ethanol dehydrogenation. The rate-determining step of this
reaction is the coupling of two acetaldehyde molecules to form 2-butenal. This work provides a strategy to catalyze the efficient
conversion of ethanol to high value-added aromatic alcohols and contributes to the development of protocols for sustainable
synthesis of aromatic alcohols from biomass through heterogeneous catalysts.
KEYWORDS: ethanol upgrading, aromatic alcohol, hydroxyapatite, zinc, DFT
1.


========== EXPERIMENTAL ==========

EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
2.1. Catalyst Synthesis. Hydroxyapatite (HAP) obtained from
Acros Organics with a Ca/P ratio of 1.67 was used as the precursor
for the synthesis of zinc-loaded hydroxyapatite (Zn-HAP) through an
impregnation method. In this method, HAP was impregnated with
Zn(NO3)2 (Sinopharm) and deionized water at room temperature for
0.5 h. Subsequently, the impregnated samples were dried in air at 50
°C for 12 h and then calcined in air at 400 °C for 2 h at a rate of 5 °C
min−1 to obtain the as-prepared Zn-HAP catalyst.
2.2. Characterization. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was
conducted on a Panalytical X’pert Pro Super X-ray diffractometer
using Cu Kα radiation (40 kV, 40 mA, λ = 0.15406 nm) over an
angular range of 5−80° (2 theta). Inductively coupled plasma optical
emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) was used to characterize the zinc
content by an Optima2000DV. Scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) images were obtained using a Hitachi HF5000
instrument at 200 kV. The strength and number of acid and base sites
on the surfaces were studied by temperature-programmed desorption
with mass spectrometry (TPD-MS) using a Micromeritics AutoChem
II 2920 instrument. Typically, 100 mg of sample was loaded into a U-
shaped quartz tube and treated in a He flow at 400 °C for 2 h to clean
the surface. When the sample temperature dropped to 100 °C, the
surface was sequentially swept by a He flow for 0.5 h, a CO2 or NH3
flow for 0.5 h, and then a He flow for 1 h to remove any weakly
adsorbed CO2. Finally, the sample was heated from 50 to 400 °C in a
He flow with a rate of 10 °C·min−1.
2.3. Catalytic Activity Measurements. The catalytic perform-
ance was tested under atmospheric pressure in a quartz-tube fixed bed
microreactor with an inner diameter of 8 mm. The catalyst was
pretreated in the N2 flow at 400 °C for 2 h before the test, and the
same bed height was maintained. During the test, the flow rate of the
carrier gas nitrogen is 30 mL·min−1 to ensure that the c

pheric pressure in a quartz-tube fixed bed
microreactor with an inner diameter of 8 mm. The catalyst was
pretreated in the N2 flow at 400 °C for 2 h before the test, and the
same bed height was maintained. During the test, the flow rate of the
carrier gas nitrogen is 30 mL·min−1 to ensure that the catalytic
reaction is in the kinetic zone. Ethanol, dried prior to use by mixing
with calcium oxide to remove water, was fed into the reactor through
a bubbler with a N2 carrier. The gas product was analyzed using a gas
chromatograph (GC) with a flame ionization detector (FID) and a
thermal conductivity detector (TCD). The Zn-HAP catalyst exhibited
good stability in a 40 h test, showing an average carbon deposition
rate of 0.0035 mg/min. As the feed rate of ethanol is 3.7 mg/min, the
deposited carbon only accounts for 0.1%, indicating that the carbon
balance is close to 100%.
The ethanol conversion and product selectivity were calculated on
the basis of moles of carbon in the products, respectively:
Ethanol conversion:
i
k
jjjjjjj
y
{
zzzzzzz
N
A
f
N
A
f
NA f
con. (%)
1
100
i
i
i i
out,ethanol
out,ethanol out,ethanol
out,ethanol
out,ethanol out,ethanol
2
=
+
×
Product selectivity:
NA f
NA f
Sel. (%)
100
i
i i
i
i
i i
2
=
×
where Ni, Ai, and f i represent the carbon number, the FID peak area,
and the response factor of each product, respectively.
Turnover frequency (TOF):
F
M
D
TOF
Con. (s )
Ethanol
Zn
Zn
1
=
where FEthanol, MZn, and DZn represent the flow rate of ethanol, the
molar mass of zinc, and the dispersion of zinc, respectively. The
dispersion of zinc is estimated by the XRD patterns.
2.4. Computational Method. All calculations were performed by
the density functional theory (DFT) method implemented in the
Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP 5.4.4).21,22 The Perdew−
Burke−Ernzerhof (PBE) method was adopted for the exchange
correlation
energy. 2 3 , 2 4
Hexagonal
hydroxyapatite
((Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2, space group P63/m) was used to prepare a
HAP 2 × 2 × 1 supercell


========== RESULTS ==========

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Catalyst Characterization. The X-ray diffraction of
HAP and Zn-HAP was investigated to analyze the effect of Zn
doping on their structural properties. Figure 1 shows the
diffraction peaks of the (002), (211), and (300) crystal planes
on both samples. The angles of these peaks match well with
those of the stoichiometric hydroxyapatite used as a reference,
identifying that the HAP catalyst presents a hexagonal
structure in the P63/m space group. The XRD pattern of Zn-
HAP retains the features of pure HAP, indicating that the Zn
doping did not cause phase transition. No characteristic crystal
planes of ZnO, Zn3P2, or Zn3(PO4)2 were detected at a 1.4 wt
% loading of Zn. As the loading of Zn increased, the ZnO peak
appeared, and its intensity gradually grew monotonously
(Figure S1). This suggests that Zn is highly dispersed at low
loadings and anchored at its doping site, which was confirmed
ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
pubs.acs.org/journal/ascecg
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.3c05085
ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2023, 11, 16300−16309
16301
by the in situ XRD results in the temperature range of 50−600
°C (Figure S2).
The STEM images (Figure 2 and Figure S3) collected from
various regions of the catalyst indicated that there were no
observable Zn-rich domains, which can be attributed to the
high lattice match between Zn and Ca in HAP,31,32 as proved
by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Figure 2b).
The lack of Zn-containing aggregates on the surface of the Zn-
HAP catalyst in the TEM images and the absent peaks of Zn-
containing species in the X-ray diffraction pattern indicate the
successful preparation of the highly dispersed Zn-HAP catalyst.
The surface basicity of HAP and Zn-HAP, which determines
the product distribution,33 was evaluated by CO2-TPD
experiments. As shown in Figure 3a, three CO2 desorption
peaks at 122, 195, and 253 °C were observed for both catalysts,
corresponding to the weak basic

een the reactions over the HAP and Zn-
HAP catalysts was the selectivity of the products with the
aliphatic products favored in the former while the aromatic
alcohols favored in the latter (Figure 4). On HAP, ethanol
mainly underwent coupling reactions to produce straight chain
alcohol with over 90% selectivity. At 250 °C, n-butanol was the
main product. Elevation of temperature resulted in growing
hydrocarbon chains, and the major products remained
saturated aliphatic alcohols with negligible unsaturated
alcohols and aldehydes (Figure 4a).
Compared with HAP, Zn-HAP showed a much higher
activity in view of the significantly increased ethanol
conversion (29.8% vs 63.1% at 325 °C). In the meantime,
the major products were methylbenzyl alcohols, suggesting
that the channels to produce aliphatic products were
suppressed (Figure 4b) and implicating that the ethanol
conversion on HAP and Zn-HAP proceeded along different
pathways. Elevation of temperature accelerated the conversion
rate significantly but did not change the aromatics distribution,
and the selectivity of the ortho- and para-products remained 35
and 2% (±1%). When twice as much ethanol was fed, the
selectivity of ortho-aromatics was measured as 32% at 250 °C
and 35% at 325 °C, respectively. The marginal difference
suggests that the formation of aromatic products reached
equilibrium on the Zn-HAP catalyst (Figure S4). At elevated
temperatures, the total selectivity of aliphatic alcohols C4−12−
OH decreased (20.8%), while that of acetaldehyde increased
(23.0% at 325 °C).
We also noted that during the ethanol conversion on Zn-
HAP, there was excess amount of acetaldehyde intermediate of
up to 23% detected while negligible 2-butenal intermediate,
Figure 1. XRD patterns of HAP and Zn-HAP (1.4 wt %).
Figure 2. (a) STEM image and (b) EDS mapping of original, calcium, oxygen, and zinc of Zn-HAP (1.4 wt %).
ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
pubs.acs.org/journal/ascecg
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs

s.
3.2.2. Influence of Zn Loading. Table 1 shows the effect of
Zn loading on the selectivity of the major oxygen-containing
products. In general, the doping of Zn not only raised the
conversion rate of ethanol but also significantly changed the
product distribution. With the increase in Zn loading in the
range of 0 to 1.4 wt %, the selectivity of aromatics increased
sharply from 0.4 to 36.5%, and the selectivity of acetaldehyde
gradually increased from 1.6 to 23.0%. Meanwhile, the
selectivity of long-chain aliphatic alcohols, such as n-butanol,
dramatically decreased from 53.6 to 11.0%. The results
indicate that Zn dopants effectively promote ethanol
dehydrogenation, thereby modulating the reaction path and
the product distribution. The TOF value of Zn site could reach
2.51 × 10−2 s−1, which is much higher than that of the best
previously reported transition metal-doped HAP catalyst (1.63
× 10−2 s−1 on Co-HAP).19 When the Zn loading is above 1.4
wt %, the ethanol conversion decreases due to the growth of
metal clusters (Figure S1) with poorer dehydrogenation
activity (Figure S5).
3.2.3. Mechanism. The selectivity of aromatics on the Zn-
HAP catalyst is ∼100 times that on the HAP, implicating the
different reaction pathways on the two catalysts. To under-
stand the reasons for the significant difference between the two
catalysts in catalyzing the ethanol conversion, experiments with
various WHSV values were conducted to manipulate the
contact time of ethanol on the Zn-HAP catalysts. Figure 6
shows the positive correlation between contact time,
represented by 1/WHSV, and the yield of acetaldehyde on
Zn-HAP, and the sharp increase at a short contact time
suggests that acetaldehyde is the primary product formed by
the ethanol dehydrogenation. As the contact time increases to
above 0.2 h, the yield of acetaldehyde tends to be stable and
the yield of 2-butenal remains low, indicating that 2-butenal
can hardly accumulate under the experimental conditions and
is rapidly con

l upgrading to
aromatics on Zn-HAP is summarized in Scheme 2.
3.2.4. Stability of the Catalyst. Stability is one of the key
characteristic parameters in the evaluation of solid catalysts.
Figure 8 shows the time evolution of the Zn-HAP catalyst
performance in the conversion of ethanol to aromatic alcohol
at 325 °C. During the initial stage of the reaction, the
conversion rate declined first and then remained stable, and
the 2-MB selectivity showed the same trend. The initial
decrease in activity was attributed to the rapid polymerization
of acetaldehyde into polycyclic substances covering part of the
surface sites (Figure S7). This is confirmed by the recovery of
the catalyst at 400 °C for 2 h in an air atmosphere.
The recovered catalyst was subjected to an ethanol
conversion reaction under the same test conditions, and a
similar catalytic performance to the previous catalytic test was
obtained. This showed that the recovery of the catalyst can
restore both its initial and operational activity as the fresh
catalyst, and the conversion rate of ethanol and the selectivity
of aromatics were retained. These results show that the catalyst
not only has good stability but also can be conveniently
recovered with good recyclability. These properties enable it to
be one of the potential industrial catalysts.
3.3. DFT Calculation. In the XRD characterization of Zn-
HAP, the pattern of hexagonal hydroxyapatite was observed,
which is also generally considered to be more active than
monoclinic hydroxyapatite.40 Thus, when the Zn-HAP models
were prepared, the hexagonal conformation was adopted, as
shown in Figure 9a. In the models, the calcium ions
coordinated with nine oxygen atoms of phosphate groups are
denoted as CaI sites, and those coordinated with six oxygen
atoms of phosphate groups and one from the hydroxyl group
are denoted as CaII sites.40 Considering that no noticeable
metal particles were observed at a low loading of Zn, when
preparing the Zn-HAP model, only one Zn2+